This project is for CSCI 5448 at CU Boulder in the Spring 2026 semester.

## Final Push Notes

This project aims to test different linguistic parsing strategies for NLP tasks. While I initially planned on doing multiple NLP tasks, timing allowed for only Sentiment Analysis at this stage. The project takes Universal Dependency (UD) or Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR) graphs, and builds a universal graph object from them. It then featurizes aspects of this graph and feeds the features (along with edge information) into a Relational Graph Convolutional Neural Network (RGCN) for predicting whether texts have negative, positive, or neutral sentiment. I used the Kaggle sentiment analysis dataset for this project.

While the classification accuracy and fscore measurements were not quite as high as I had hoped (highest accuracy was 65% for 2000 UD sentences and 55% for 1000 AMR sentences), the project's primary focus at this stage was applying Object Oriented design practices to develop an organized and maintainable system. In this project, I used the strategy pattern, factory pattern, decorator pattern, builder pattern, and facade pattern, and kept core OOP principles in mind throughout the project's design. I utilized a simple command line UI to allow a user to customize model parameters or look at prior results, keeping an overview of results in a .csv file and a more detailed glimpse into run in a corresponding .json file. If I return to this project, I would want to shift over to a GUI.

As for the results, it is an uphill battle for a purely structural and static sentence representation to match high-end sentiment classification models with learned, contextual embeddings. My project paired static word embeddings with graph structures to try to get contextual word meaning in a different way than classical transformers models, where every word's embedding is influenced by every prior word's embedding. If I return to this project, it would be more interesting to see if graph based sentence structures could be used in conjunction with contextual embeddings to strengthen or fine-tune them, rather than replace them. 

This hybrid approach would also address the data set limitations that I ran into with this project. Even runs of 1000 or 2000 datapoints were computationally expensive due to the parsing packages themselves requiring a lot of processing power to learn synctactic and semantic patterns, and so my models never really had anywhere close to the data they would need to fully learn structural patterns. A hybrid model would take some of the "pressure" off of learning nuanced structural patterns. 

This computational price was especially true for the AMR graphs, which hold more semantic meaning than UD graphs but are harder to parse. While UD graphs contain nodes explicitly matching the words of the initial sentence and create grammatical connections between them, AMR graphs create abstractions of a sentence's meaning and create semantic connections between them. A UD graph would still store information about each word, but an AMR graph would typically have less nodes than words in the original sentence, and transform larger phrases into single nodes. This abstraction is why the UD graphs actually performed better at at semantics related task, because part of a UD node's features was a compressed word embedding relating to the corresponding word, while part of an AMR node's features was a compressed word embedding of an consolidated 'concept.' It would be interesting to see which would perform better in a hybrid model approach.

Finally, the task itself may not be the best task for a RGCN in the first place, as sentiment analysis requires a lot of contextual knowledge. Perhaps the results would be better for part of speech tagging, relation extraction, or some other natural language processing task. 


## Update for mid project review:

I have committed most of the work so far to understanding the types of semantic graphs I will use, understanding the libraries I will use, and creating and testing a Featurizer class which turns the universal Graph object into features for plugging into various pytorch models. Each Graph stores two lists: one for nodes and one for edges. Information such as part of speech, word embedding, and head are stored in the nodes, and information such as source and target are stored in the edges. The Featurizer reads in library specific objects for AMR and UD graphs and transforms them into universal Graph objects, while also featurizing Graph information into a format that can be read into pytorch models. Right now, only usability for UD graphs, and only features for Nodes (not Edges), have been implemented. All the tests in featurizer_test.py are successful.


This project makes use of the adapter pattern, the strategy pattern, and the template pattern.

### Adapter Pattern
This is the most important design pattern for this project. In essence, the goal of the project is to create a new universal class, Graph, which adapts AMR and UD graphs from different libraries into the same object. Each of amrlib and stanza use different methods to build their graphs, but the core construction of nodes and edges is the same. Graph objects are created in Featurizer.get_graph_from_ud or Featurizer.get_graph_from_amr and built based on the specific properties of the AMR and UD objects imported from the libraries.

### Template Pattern
The template pattern is used in creating the different models, as each model extends a template Model class that contains information about inputting data, training, and evaluating. The SentimentAnalysis class shows where this is headed, and further models for part of speech tagging, key word tagging, and perhaps others wil lbe added. This is not as clear of an implementation of the template pattern as homework assignments, as python does not have abstract methods and cannot force implementation standards across subclasses, but the goal is to have many models that can be trained and called using methods in the superclass. 

### Factory Pattern
The factory pattern will be used to create different models. I am using the Template pattern for this, and a simple factory pattern will be helpful for encapsulating the creation of Model objects. The factory pattern is implemented in model_factory.py. Right now, I have only started with the sentiment analysis model, but there will additional models as I continue with the project.